# Zen and the Art of Model Management
**Why Excel’s best days are still ahead**

The name of this article is a tip of the hat to the great [‘Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance’](https://www.google.com/search?q=zen+and+the+art+of+motorcycle+maintenance) by Robert M. Pirsig that discusses (amongst many other things) different ways of how people experience the world, proposing that certain people primarily experience what something does, the result, while others see things in terms of what they are, as interacting components. There is no single right or wrong, both have validity and the best overall results are achieved when both exist in synergy. If you're interested I can highly recommend the book, else [this video](https://youtu.be/D8Dd999DOc4) provides a good summary.

When applied to people in business (including IT as these are inseparable these days) one could argue that the result driven (happy customers, bottom line) people tend to dominate the holistic side where the classical thinkers tend to gravitate towards IT. From personal experience I vividly remember a situation where one IT manager scolded a junior for not sticking to camelCase naming convention while the next minute being completely indifferent about missing the deadline for using the new system in pricing contracts that season. 

When applied to programming tools, we can map different tools along the same spectrum. Excel is a holistic ball that gives results, while other tools tend to dissect the solution into separate specialised layers and classes that combine to produce the result. That could explain why Excel is not equally loved by both sides of the spectrum, to put it mildly. Crack programmers tend to look down on it as something messy and impure while business users absolutely love it. 

With Excel you build the result, interactively by exmaple. With programmings languages you program a machine that then produces the result. Also the feedback loop of Excel is shorter, when you change a formula or input, the results are instantly recomputed. Other languages have you type here, run there. This requires programmers to envision the steps in their heads, work out the solution and code that out in text. This is a more indirect and abstract way of solving a problem. Combined, Excel will always have a far lower cognitive overhead required for solving a task than ‘programming languages’. 

Therefore the reason people love Excel is not something that is going to go away soon, it's psychological. Many people will not be able (or find satisfaction in) solving their problems with programming languages, even Python. Since the days of COBOL people have been dreaming of everyone being a coder and it has eluded us ever since. Maybe there’s a reason for that, that coder in that classical sense is not something most people can or like to do. If we use the wider defenition of 'coder', Excel has been making these people coders since 1985.

A way forward is for both views to exist in synergy. A more organic, result driven approach to prototype in, a failfast environment where people can quicly iterate towards something that sticks. They'll know what they want when the see it. That is a fast way to innovate towards profitable product market combinations. Now this world can seamlessly integrate with structured and stable systems that can automate at larger scale. This puts everyone in their powerzone. 

This is what XLConnect does. Take the favorite tool of the result driven people, and create a seamless growth path towards more stable solutions. Where Excel and IT used to be two seperate worlds divided by a canyon, that now becomes a spectrum that users can move along in small incremental steps.